## Introduction

`1997`. I was twelve, visiting my uncle, and facing a technological miracle: an IBM-compatible PC with a Pentium 75Mhz chip. Though ancient even then, that machine, and the accompanying "IBM PC User Guide" by Viktor Figurnov, set my life's trajectory.

A year later, I had my own machine, and by 2003, I knew my professional direction. University and subsequent roles - from local hospital support to my current SRE role in a global company - forged me into the engineer I am today.

That journey has given me a career full of stories, but that is not the point of this book. This book is not about **what** we do as SREs, but **how** we do it. There are many books that describe what to do with these or those services, different methodologies that tell our managers how to build processes and distribute tasks, but none of them can explain how we should deal with all this stuff. How to focus on what really matters without being distracted by the permanent noise of incidents and incoming messages. How to plan a work in that continuously moving environment and, what is more important, how to stick to this plan. How to defend yourself from burning out and at the same time keep developing your skills day by day.

The first few years I worked as many of us. Continuously staying in reactive mode and firefighting, without any possibility to delve deeply into planned tasks. The detrimental effects of context switching are talked about in every profession, but let’s be honest: **WE** are the true experts in involuntary context switching. Of course, we are permanently automating processes, we are permanently decreasing the number of alerts. But whatever we do, shit happens every day. At any moment of any day someone or something needs your attention.

This became especially a problem when instant messaging services appeared. It's not enough that someone always needs a piece of your attention, now they want it immediately, right now. You are always on call. Just you dive into the task you planned for today, as someone writes you to ask code-review, or some questions about yesterday alert, whatever. You’re switching to the message, and doing what is needed from you. Then you’re trying to remember where you stopped, spending time to concentrate on the task again, deep into it, and another message, worst of all, someone decides to tag all in an absolutely non-urgent, informational announcement—which you’d read anyway when you had the bandwidth, but now it demands immediate attention.

After a few years of being in this hamster wheel, I understood that the problem is not in companies or processes. That is me, I’m doing something wrong. And I must realize what. I read different books from different fields of knowledge, Management, Time Management, Psychology, Kaizen, DevOps, different researches, etc. Even medical literature to understand how our brain works and why it behaves exactly the way it does. *(Spoiler alert: medical researchers know not as much about our brain as we would like to know.)* I was taking different practices one by one and just tested them on me. Of course that’s not so easy to measure productivity, but for starters I decided to use only one binary metric: works on me or doesn’t work on me. If something doesn’t work in a 3 month period, that means that it is not suitable for me, or maybe it needs some modifications. For many years I was gathering all this information in my notebooks, digital and analog. Some of them I continue to practice to this day, some I don’t. When all that gathered knowledge reached critical mass, I decided that the time had come to share all this information to the external world. And, if this book will help at least one person, I will be sure that everything was not in vain.

I came up with nothing new; these are not my original research findings. This is simply the accumulated, tested knowledge I found by looking at the problem differently. This is **What Everyone Knows**.

---

[Te the next chapter =>](./0.02-warning.md)