
## I. Give me one hour to work

Let's take a look at what a typical work day looks like. You come to the office, pour yourself a coffee, and exchange a few words with a few colleagues. Then you go to your workplace, read emails and messenger. Maybe have a daily meeting. After that you decide that it’s time to work on your main task, you are remembering where you stopped yesterday, preparing to  continue, and it takes another 15-20 minutes of your time. Just when you start work, you see a messenger notification. You read it, that’s some announcement that says the utility A will be updated this week, and if your service uses library B version lower than x.y, you must make some adjustment in your service config. From now all your attention is focused on the “library B”, you can’t just keep working on your main task, because it’s necessary for you to check what version of this library your service uses, your mind demands it so hard. You check it in the repository, and it looks like you’re safe. But to be sure, you decide to check directly on the hosts. While you’re waiting for Ansible execution,  your eye falls on a browser tab with your favorite social network. “Why not check what's there since I'm waiting anyway”, you think. You open it, there are a couple notifications about your friends' last posts, you read them, watch a couple short videos, and stick there for another 15 minutes. Meanwhile you see that the hosts have the right library B version as well, and you can return to your work. You do that, but a small part of your attention is stuck on previous tasks. You notice like some extraneous thoughts flash in your brain. What would you do if the library version was lower, some thoughts about your friend’s post because you can't agree with his point of view. You work on your main task until your colleague messages you to ask for review of a rollout plan he prepared for his work. You switch your attention to the plan, but while you are reading it and make some notices, you get another message from another colleague inviting you to lunch. 

Do you already see the problem? Half a day has passed, but how much time have you spent working on YOUR task, on which your career, your success and your good mood depends? One hour? Looks not very productive. But ok, let’s take everything in order.

Probably you already heard about context switching (aka task switching). Many people know that that’s something scary we must avoid, otherwise it will get you. But that is not enough for us. We'll try to get to the bottom of it. To manipulate something, and use it for our purposes we must know how it works. You've always known this rule, it's very simple and works in all areas of your life: We can only effectively control what we know how it works. If you want to take control of any part of your life, just understand how it works and you’ll see its strengths and weaknesses.


### THEORY

Let’s delve into Context Switching.  

In 2001 David E. Meyer, Joshua S. Rubinstein, and Jeffrey E. Evans published their work known as "Executive Control of Cognitive Processes in Task Switching". They conducted a series of experiments and, long story short, confirmed that multitasking is inefficient because switching between tasks imposes a significant, inevitable mental cost. Their research perfectly shows the existence of a switch cost. People are consistently slower and commit more errors when they have to switch from one task to another compared to when they simply repeat the same task. Crucially, this cost occurs even when the switch is fully predictable, meaning the brain must spend time and energy on mental reconfiguration even when it knows what's coming. Speaking our language, to start executing a new task, our brain must switch its context, something like a set of environment variables which describes settings of the current task. And this unloading of old and loading of new variables costs our brain processing time. According to research by Meyer, Rubinstein and Evans, the cumulative time lost due to these task switching can consume as much as 40% of a person's productive time over a workday.

In their experiments they used small tasks. These tasks have a very simple set of settings and take from one to a few seconds. But for larger tasks which have a complicated mental model as a setting, the results can be more devastating. And this is where the first rule comes from. To increase our productivity we must reduce the number of context switches during the work on our main task.

This picture was supplemented by Sophie Leroy, who added another variable to this equation. She introduced and studied in detail the concept of Attention Residue.

Probably you already know this feeling when you are working on your task and someone calls or messages you to ask your opinion about some new approach that just came to his or her mind. You discuss that, decide how to apply this new approach to existing processes and after the call you turn back to your current task. You're working on your issue and feel like in the background your brain keeps generating ideas related to that new approach your colleague proposed. You think about how to improve it, or how to make it more useful, and how to not destroy what already works. That's an Attention Residue trap. Let's see how it works.

When you switch from “Task A” to “Task B”, some cognitive traces and thoughts related to “Task A” continue to occupy part of your work memory. Even when you already actively work on a new task. Our brain just can't immediately close the old task and offload its context.  Part of our cognitive resources keep producing, thinking over or worrying about unfinished or interrupted  “Task A”. That leads to a situation where you start a new “Task B” with reduced cognitive capacity. On top of that, the more complex and difficult the old task is, the lower your productivity and quality will be on the new one.

And this is the second condition we must pay attention to. You know it all too well: one small, unresolved problem you're told about in the morning can ruin your entire day. Because you'll constantly be distracted by it and wondering how to solve it.

The next point I want to draw your attention to is the Zeigarnic Effect. In 1927 Soviet psychologist Bluma Zeigarnik published results of her experiments based on works of her academic advisor Kurt Lewin. With her research she confirmed that interrupted tasks are remembered better than completed ones. That means that, technically speaking, unfinished tasks take up more working memory and, as a result, leave more residual attention. Our brain kinda cries “return and complete the task”. This is now known as the Zeigarnik effect. Every time when we start a new task it creates in our brain a quasi-need, which is similar to a biological need, to finish the task. This creates a cognitive tension system. When the task is completed, the tension system is discharged and the brain can "release" the information. However, when the task is interrupted (and left unfinished), the tension system is maintained. This maintained tension keeps the information in working memory (or at the forefront of attention), which explains better retention.

This clearly explains why unfinished tickets and interrupted tasks cause such a high Attention Reduce.

However, in 2011 a group led by Masicampo and Baumeister conducted research based on the Zeigarnik effect. Their goal was to prove that unfinished goals reduce cognitive abilities because they take up space in our memory. The experiment was as follows. Subjects were given tasks and interrupted. Group A – just interrupted; Group B – interrupted, but before that they were given 5 minutes to write down a specific plan (when and how they will complete this task). In result, the group which wrote down a clear plan, showed significantly less cognitive decline after switching to the next task . The specific planning process gives the unconscious a signal “Now I've written when it will be done. Now I can let it go.”. This effectively relieves Zeigarnik tension without requiring immediate completion.

On the one hand, the Zeigarnik effect enhances the impact of Attention Residue, on the other hand, the later works based on the Zeigarnik effect give us an instrument for manipulation of Attention Residue. At first it sounds pretty easy: To reduce the Attention Residue, we must write down a Ready-To-Resume Plan.


### PRACTICE

Now let's see how all this knowledge can help us in real life.

The first point we emphasized from the theory is that we must reduce the number of contest switches. Frankly, for me this is the hardest one. It's difficult for me to resist immediately answering questions in Slack. Because I feel a strong sense of ownership over the services I maintain and the expertise I have. As I know, I'm  not alone, many people have the same problem. But we should understand, most of these messages are not urgent. No one dies if you answer one hour later. I think I'm not wrong if I say that almost all of these requests can be easily postponed for a few hours, or even to the next day. 

Yes, sometimes waiting for someone's reaction blocks a task execution. It may happen when you are waiting for review, or approval, or just the opinion of a colleague with greater expertise. I can't stress this enough, no one dies if you postpone this task until the answer is received, and switch to another task. You will return to the first one in an hour or two, and check if it moves forward or not, but you mustn't actively wait. I saw it with my own eyes as people couldn't do anything else while waiting for review, they were scrolling a social network feed, or watching YouTube while waiting. If someone procrastinates because you didn't answer him immediately it's not your fault. You shouldn't feel guilty because you've blocked  someone's work for a couple of hours.

So, how can we reduce the number of context switches? I'm not suggesting you ignore your colleagues during the work, or to work the whole day without distractions to other things. That would be cruel. I just suggest setting aside one hour of your normal workday for focusing on your main task and only on it. Further I'll use the term Deep Work for these sessions, I read in the “Deep Work” book by Cal Newport. If you want to deepen your understanding of Deep Work conception, I strongly recommend you to read it. Mr. Newport has done a tremendous amount of work in researching and popularizing the principles of deep work and their importance in different jobs and activities.

Before this Deep Work hour starts, remove any distractions from your view, anything that might interfere with your concentration. Switch your devices to Do-Not-Disturb mode, to not see any notifications. During these Deep Work sessions you mustn’t do anything else that is not a part of the main task. Remove all unnecessary items from the table. Turn on noise cancellation on your headphones. If you listen to music to concentrate, prepare a playlist in advance to not interrupt the work with changing a song, or finding a new playlist, etc. For example, I use the same playlist during Deep Work sessions, which I don’t hear in other cases. It's like a signal for my brain, like Pavlov’s dog, “time to get ready dude, we’re working now”. This helps to get into the right frame of mind.

If it’s mentally too difficult for you to go to DND mode on all your devices, and you are afraid to miss something really important, just prepare for an emergency. Set your status in work messenger, something like *“Deep Work, until `time`”*, or *“In Focus Mode, back at `time`”*, or *“Heads Down on `ticket`, Responding at `time`”*. That shows to your colleagues that you are not ignoring them, but just busy right now, and you will answer them later in a certain period of time. Add important phone numbers, such as your wife, husband, children, maybe your manager, whoever, into the VIP-list to give them the possibility to call you if something urgent and important will happen. These help your restless brain to calm down, and to not check the phone every 15 minutes. Explain to yourself that this is only for one hour, and you're not in a bunker or on the Moon, and people anyway find you if something really urgent and important will happen.

For starters I recommend using only one one-hour Deep Work session per day. For many cases it should be enough to do something noticeable. And, at the same time, that's not so long to start feeling that you're missing something important and losing control of the situation. It's important to emphasize, I do not suggest you work one hour a day on your main task. I suggest working one hour a day in focus mode, deeply. 

Choose a time when you are most productive and book it for this session. For most people this time is in the morning, while we have not yet so much Attention Residue, and while our brain is not so busy with computing all issues we got during the day. Try your first Deep Work sessions at the first part of the workday.

To write this book I get up at 6AM every morning. This gives me one and half hours before my office work, or even more at weekends while my wife and child are sleeping. I tested different approaches, and this one showed itself more successful. Because this is the time when I've not read yet emails, messages, news, and other new information. My work memory is empty and I can completely focus on the book without distractions.

When you understand and experience for yourself how it works, you will see what you should do next. Someone experiences that one hour is not enough for him to deepen into the task, and extend the session to two hours. Someone adds another one-hour session into the workday schedule.

There are many tricks that can make this one hour more productive and more valuable, and we will discuss them in next chapters.
