## 1.02 - Sprints

Have you run a marathon? I think it's one of those things you don't need to try yourself to understand that it's very difficult and demanding. Most people can't do it physically (me, for example). To finish a marathon you must be in good shape, have good health, and be properly trained. But if we take a look at your entire running history, and sum up the segments you ever run, what do we get? How many marathons have we run in our lives? Even without special preparations and training, every month we cover huge distances just by moving in short segments every day. It's a very simple logic and it works in many areas of your life. And that's **What Everyone Knows**. 

Of course it's not the same as a real marathon. But from the perspective of the work accomplished, it's the same amount of work done over time. And sometimes even more, because you start every new chunk full of energy and motivation.

In engineering, we often try to run a marathon at sprint speed. This leads to **Thermal Throttling**  (burnout). I saw many good engineers who came to the company and started to work at a light speed, but one or maybe two years later I've seen their lifeless eyes. It's not because they were not properly trained or had a bad shape, but just because they were drowning in the chaos of unresolved issues and technical debt. Even top-trained and strongest athletes can't handle a train cart falling on their heads. The only way I see is to learn how to avoid such consequences.  

In this chapter, I want to talk about sub-tasking, how to use it, and when and why it's needed. I argue that sub-tasking isn't just "organization" - it's **Flow Management** which helps you to not lose control and not dip into the chaos working on big complex tasks. And below I'll try to explain why.
 
### Example 1

Imagine a common task: you need to upgrade the “Service A” from version `2.x` to `3.x`. On the surface, it’s a standard ticket that might simply read:  

` • Upgrade Service A to 3.x across all environments.`  

But let's look closer. This is a major update. In our world, that likely means these versions are incompatible and require data or metadata migration. Once that migration is finished, there may be no way to roll back. What does this imply? It means that we should be well-prepared; blindly updating production is a recipe for disaster. Suddenly, a “trivial” task becomes complex and potentially dangerous. Now, we need to design rollout and rollback plans, test the 
upgrade path, update staging, hit production, and then review all related documentation - the list goes on.  
So, you start your task. You're discovering what you need to do during the upgrade, and writing a plan. In the middle of the work you remember that you must check metrics to ensure that all you need exists. You switch to the metrics and get stuck there for a while. Then you return back, read the plan draft from the beginning to restore the context, but get distracted by Ansible, because you must check if your Ansible-collection supports a config option you must update 
during the upgrade. And so, you are in a wild whirlwind.

This is exactly how I approached things in the beginning. I perceived such tasks as monoliths. While working on one part, I would stumble upon new questions that needed solving. I’d switch to those new questions, falling into a chaotic, uncontrollable whirlwind. Of course, I produced some results every day, but by the evening, I felt a deep sense of frustration. I couldn’t measure my progress. I had a persistent feeling that the task was growing faster than I could resolve it, because I was uncovering more questions that I was providing answers to.

So, let’s figure out exactly why this trap works, and why we fell into it.  
 
[### What is wrong with the "Example 1"]: #

### The Anatomy of Monolith Task.
First things first. To fix a problem we must understand its symptoms. Let's go in order, and take a quick look at each obstacle we might encounter while working on a monolith task.

**Context Switching Cost.**  
First, monoliths - or "elephants", as it is called in time management - cause more context switches. We already spoke about the harmful influence of context switches on our productivity in the previous chapter (and will more in the future), so I will not dwell on this for long.  
Big tasks have large and complex context models. This requires more time to load and unload them from working memory. Also, if you are working on a big task the whole day, then any interruption, any incoming message is a distraction for you which forces context switching. Every time, your brain must remember where it stopped, reload the context and so on. At the same time, such big context models have huge Attention Residue, slowing down the performance of every task that interrupts you. It takes a lot of your time.

**The Result Measurement.**  
It's a very underrated symptom, but on a long distance it becomes crucial. When you work on a monolith task, it’s hard to understand how far you have come during the day, because you are permanently switching from one thought to another (even inside one task). Working on configuration you see a property and remember that you didn’t describe it in the documentation. Then, you switch to documentation, write down the part you just remembered, and return to the configuration. As a result, at the very end of the day, you have many small outcomes from different parts of the task. This result is very difficult to measure.
If you can’t see a clear result for a while, it can become a demotivating factor. This leads to a chronic dissatisfaction with your work. This dissatisfaction lowers motivation, reduces productivity, and eventually leads to burnout. I presume many of us are familiar with this feeling: you’ve worked hard the whole day, you are exhausted, yet at the very end of the day, you don’t see a significant outcome. You feel like nothing was actually done.  

It’s a horrible feeling. I know it well.

**Monolith Paralysis.**  
That's a classic psychological hurdle. When we face a monolith task, our brain doesn't see a career opportunity or a creative project; it sees a predatory beast. Have you noticed that sometimes you don't want to start a task because it feels complex and obscure? It usually comes down to three psychological triggers.   

First, we deal with the **"Amygdala Hijack"**. A massive, ill-defined task triggers the  brain's threat center (the amygdala). Since the task feels impossible to complete in one sitting, the brain perceives it as a source of certain failure or pain, triggering a "freeze" response. But in this state, the brain doesn't just "freeze", it actively seeks "immediate gratification" to offset the stress. This is why you suddenly find yourself cleaning your desk, checking email, or scrolling a social network. Your brain is trading the Long-Term Value of the project for a Short-Term Dopamine Hit to escape the "threat" of the task.  
Then comes **"Decision Fatigue"**, also known as the "Where do I start?" problem. A monolith task often lacks a clear entry point. The mental energy required just to figure out the first step is often higher than the energy available, so we opt for a low-energy activity instead (like scrolling social media).  
Finally, we hit the wall of **Low Self-Efficacy**. According to psychologist Albert Bandura's theory, if we don't believe we can successfully execute a task, we won't try. A monolith feels "un-executable", crushing our confidence before we even pick up a pen.

**The "What is next?" Tax.**  
When a task is not decomposed into strict, granular chunks, you pay a "tax" every few minutes.
You finish writing a function. You stop. You look at the 500 lines of code remaining. Your brain asks: *"What should I do next?"*. And here we are again, the "Decision Fatigue" face to face.
This question is a **vulnerability**. It's a gap in your "system's defenses" where procrastination enters. Because your brain is tired of the big task, it chooses the easiest "next step": *Check Slack, open a news tab, or get another coffee*.

**The Fog of War.**
Since you are discovering the map on the executing phase without a proper plan, you're opening the landscape in real time, and can only see the next 5 meters. You don't know if there is a landmine (such as circular dependency or a breaking change) 20 meters ahead.You move slowly and tentatively because you are afraid of what you can't see.

**The Fog of Recall.**  
Probably the most dangerous symptom. Because it not only slows your progress, but in some circumstances can be destructive. Our memory is not perfect. Trying to hold such a large and complex object in your head is very risky. You can just forget or miss something important. In a positive scenario - you just lose some time, but sometimes it can cost hours of uptime of the service you're responsible for.  

Searching we can find many more symptoms which block or slow your productivity, but most of them upon deep analysis most of them will be reduced to the six I listed above.

### The Science of the "Chunk".
To explain my point more properly I want to go deep into a theory. The first thing I want to draw your attention to is the human's Reward System. Returning to the marathon-sprint analogy, it's not necessary to finish a marathon to force your brain to release another micro-dose of dopamine. It's doing that at every "milestone" and every accomplished task.  
Why is it so important?

// --- *post-mortem* ---  
**Measurable Result.**   
**The Gapless Flow.**  
**The Blast Radius Reduce.**    

---

// --- *Work in progress* ---